BIP drafts: SwiftSync Specification (#2152)
bitcoin/bips: bip-xxxx-hintsfile.md

## Specification

The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and
"OPTIONAL" in this document are to be interpreted as described in RFC 2119.

Our goal is to indicate which outputs in a block, or set of blocks, will remain unspent at a particular chain height.
There are many ways to do so, however an intuitive representation is a
[bitset](https://en.cppreference.com/w/cpp/utility/bitset.html). Each output in a block is assigned a bit, with a `0`
bit denoting the output will be spent, and a `1` to denote the output is unspent. For a block of 8 outputs, we may
arrive at a bitset of `1000 0010`, which conveys the 0th and 6th index are UTXOs.

Empirically, this representation does poorly, as the vast majority of outputs are spent. In fact, simply recording the
indices within the block that will be unspent is a more optimal approach than the bitset. For our example above, that
would be recording the numbers `0, 6`. To efficiently represent this data, we may formulate the problem as the
following: what is the most efficient way to represent $n$ random, monotonically increasing indices less than or equal

> to size $m$? In other words, for a block with $n$ unspent outputs, what is an efficient representation?

Reviewer: Maybe:

```suggestion
following: what is the most efficient way to represent a small count $n$ random, monotonically increasing indices in the range $0$ to $m$? In other words, for a block with $n$ unspent outputs, what is an efficient representation?
```

only one bit. This observation may be used to efficiently store elements. For the lowest bits of the elements, we will
represent them in a bitset, and for the highest bits, we will represent the difference in bits as unary.

We define the following:

- Let ${ i\_{0}, ..., i\_{n-1} }$ be a list of $n$ elements where $i\_{n-1} = m$
- Let $\\ell(m, n)$ be the function that determines the number of low bits to use: $\\ell(m, n) = \\left\\lfloor \\log_2
  \\ \\left(\\frac{m+1}{n}\\right) \\right\\rfloor$
- Let $\\text{unary}(q)$ be the following function: $\\text{unary}(q) = \\underbrace{0\\cdots0}\_{q}1$

We start by determining $\\ell$ for a given $n$ and $m$. For each $i$, take the $\\ell$ least significant bits and
append them, most significant bit ordering, to a bitset $L$. Next, iterate over each element and take the remaining most
significant bits, then record the difference between the last element's high bits and the current element's high bits.
Record that number using the $\\text unary$ function, and append the unary to a vector $H$. The final representation is
$m$, $n$, $L$, $H$.

### Worked Example

> Suppose $S = [3, 7, 12]$. Then $n=3$ and $m=12$.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Suppose we want to encode a sequence of numbers $S = [3, 7, 12]$. Then $n=3$ and $m=12$. Numbers up to 15 are encoded in four bits in binary.
```

#### 1. Compute the number of lower bits to use

We start by computing $\\ell$:

$\\ell = \\left\\lfloor \\log_2\\left(\\frac{m+1}{n}\\right) \\right\\rfloor = \\left\\lfloor
\\log_2\\left(\\frac{13}{3}\\right) \\right\\rfloor = \\lfloor \\log_2(4.33) \\rfloor = \\lfloor 2.11 \\rfloor = 2$

| Element | Binary | Upper (`value >> 2`) | Lower (`value & 0b11`) |
| :------ | :----- | :------------------- | :--------------------- |
| 3       | `0011` | `00` → 0             | `11` → 3               |
| 7       | `0111` | `01` → 1             | `11` → 3               |

> | 12      | `1100` | `11` → 3             | `00` → 0               |

Reviewer: The conversion to decimal makes sense for the upper, but it feels odd for the lower bits, since they are used as bits.

```suggestion
| Element | Binary | Upper (`value >> 2`) | Lower (`value & 0b11`) |
| :------ | :----- | :------------------- | :--------------------- |
| 3       | `0011` | `00` → 0             | `11`                   |
| 7       | `0111` | `01` → 1             | `11`                   |
| 12      | `1100` | `11` → 3             | `00`                   |
```

#### 2. Encode the low bits

Next, we will build $L$ by concatenating the lower bits. In the example, we have `11 11 00`, which corresponds to $L =
111100$.

#### 3. Encode the high bits

The upper values are $0, 1, 3$. We encode the gaps between consecutive upper values in unary. Note that the first

> element does not have a previous upper value to compare to, so $0$ is used.

Reviewer: Also mentioned above, but the instructions for the first element should also be in the specification rather just in the example.

```suggestion
The upper values are $0, 1, 3$. We encode the gaps between consecutive upper values in unary. Since the first 
element does not have a previous upper value, it is encoded as the difference to $0$.
```

| Hints   | `vector<EliasFano>`        | Unspent output indices per block |

The serialization of an _Elias Fano_ representation is:

| Field | Type                    | Serialization | Description               |
| :---- | :---------------------- | :------------ | :------------------------ |
| `N`   | 32-bit unsigned integer | `CompactSize` | Number of unspent indices |
| `M`   | 32-bit unsigned integer | `CompactSize` | Maximum index             |
| `L`   | `vector<byte>`          | Raw bytes     | Low-bit bitset            |
| `H`   | `vector<byte>`          | Raw bytes     | Unary-encoded high bits   |

With the exception that, for `N = 0x00`, the serialization is `0x00`.

#### Deserialization

To recover the $L$ and $H$, the client decodes $n$ and $m$, then computes the number of low bits $\\ell$. The number of
bytes to interpret as $L$ is $\\left\\lceil \\frac{n \\cdot \\ell}{8} \\right\\rceil$ and the number of bytes to
interpret as $H$ is $\\left\\lceil \\frac{n + \\lfloor m / 2^\\ell \\rfloor}{8} \\right\\rceil$.

#### Constructing the Hintsfile

An _unspendable output_ is defined as:

- An output with script length over 10,000 OR
- An output beginning with `OP_RETURN` OR

> - A BIP-30 unspendable coinbase output

Reviewer 2: I think this would be better defined in the swiftsync spec and just add a link to that document here.

The simplest way for a server to construct a hintsfile is to:

1. Read the next block
1. Initialize an empty vector
1. Set the current index to `0`
1. While outputs remain:
   1. If the output is _unspendable_, continue
   1. Query the UTXO set. If the output is not in the UTXO set, increment the current index. Otherwise, write the
      current index to the vector and go back to step 3.

> 1. Write the Elias-Fano encoding of the vector to file.

Reviewer 2: Codec standards should not specify or describe how the encoder should construct the bitstream, only how the decoder will process the received bitstream. It's up to the implementer to figure out a way to create a valid bitstream since there are potentially many ways to do so. Describing only the decoder semantics is sufficient to define what a valid bitstream is.

Author: I don't follow this at all. I did not specify how they construct the elias-fano encoding, but any hintsfile of this format must follow the elias-fano serialization above to be deserialized by a decoder.

Reviewer 2: I mean, this snippet is explaining how a theoretical/simplified encoder works, but this is unnecessary (at best) and can be removed to tighten the document.

Author: Sure, I can remove these steps given the serialization is defined already

#### Interpreting the Hintsfile

After deserializing the hints from file as described above, a client may find the indices of interest by recovering
integers $i\_{0}, .., i\_{n-1}$ using the fetch algorithm. Once the block is received, the client may then iterate over
the outputs, adding the outputs with a matching index to the UTXO set, ignoring _unspendable outputs_.

A client interpreting the hintsfile MUST fail decoding if the number of hints does not match the height recorded in the
file header. When iterating over the block outputs, a client MUST ignore _unspendable outputs_.

## Rationale

The _Elias Fano_ encoding was selected as it is was the most efficient encoding explored during the research process,
yet the implementation is concise and does not require dependencies on third party libraries. As of block height
930,000, the UTXO set may be represented in 119mb with this method, which is well within the 450mb `dbcache` requirement
in Bitcoin Core, and reasonable for most clients to hold directly in memory. This encoding represents elements in $2n +
n \\lceil \\log_2(m/n) \\rceil$ bits, which is within a reasonable bound of the theoretical optimum.

> Partitioning the hints by block is an intuitive choice, and allows for efficient random access of hints. Groupings of

Reviewer 2: > Partitioning the hints by block is an intuitive choice, and allows for efficient random access of hints.

I don't see how this can be true: the bistream has a header (`magic`, `version`, `height`) followed by a sequence of `EliasFano` items, each of which are composed by `N`, `M` (fixed size info), `L`, `H` (variable size info).

So, imagine I have a hintsfile. To find data for block `k`, one do need to (minimally) process data for block 1 to discover the size of the first `EliasFano` item (because of the variable size parts). Then, block 2 and so forth, until the intended block target. This would be true if the `EliasFano` items were fixed size among all blocks to allow for offset arithmetic, but the amount of padding would be prohibitively high.

Thus, the `hints` payload works more like a `List<EliasFano>` (requires sequential access) than a `vector<EliasFano>` (allows random access).  Of course, the decoder could create an index of offsets, but this is not only an implementation detail, but also something that will add to the required resources to process the hintsfile.

Author: Good catch, the original version had a header section, but was removed as it could be reconstructed as you described. I will remove that note.

Reviewer 2: I wonder if having more blocks taken together will not improve compression sensibly (I'll experiment with it). We can add a counter in the bitstream to allow the encoder to choose it freely (at the cost of having more bytes in the bitstream) but we potentially gain:

1. Less `H, L` pairs in the bitstream.
2. More data to feed to the Elias-fano process (tends to push it closer to the theoretical entropy).

multiple blocks were explored, however these had no effect on the file size. Thus, this format opts for simplicity. The
removal intrablock spends results in a size reduction of ~4mb for the reference height. While non-trivial, removing
these outputs from the index counter would increase the complexity of client code. In particular, portions of the
program that are concerned with _adding_ coins must also be aware of when they are _spent_. This implementation
complexity would be particularly problematic, for instance, in Bitcoin Core's `AddCoin` method.

## Generic Compression and Alternatives

This document describes how to encode a hintsfile without additional dependencies, but developers and users willing to
use generic compression algorithms like `gzip` or `zstd` may be able to compress the hints representation further. This
would indicate there are still optimizations to be made with the format of the hints, however the complexity of the
encoding and decoding may also increase. Developers and users should encode hints in any format that is suitable for

> their dependency, size, and memory requirements.

Reviewer 2: > Developers and users should encode hints in any format that is suitable for their dependency, size, and memory requirements.

This sounds like "I did all that thinking to specify a file format, but you can do whatever you want." which is probably not what was intended.

Author: All that is required to do SwiftSync is an agreed upon format between client and server on a hintsfile encoding. Take [this comment](https://github.com/btcsuite/btcd/pull/2478#issuecomment-4770939484) for example which used `gzip` and simple varints for unspent indices.

I wrote this document in the context of the Rust ecosystem, which is particularly adverse to adding dependencies, but if someone is comfortable using a generic compression algorithm, they may do so. I personally don't think "download this dependency" is a general solution, but it may work for other clients.

Reviewer 2: I get it, but feels inconsistent with the swiftsync protocol description (`bip-xxx-switfsync.md`): line 10 points that the file format bip will be required (after bips are assigned numbers?). This also harms interoperability in the ecosystem.

Author: Fair enough. I decided to remove this section entirely.

## Distribution

A malicious hintsfile distributor cannot lead a client to accepting an invalid UTXO set state, but they can expend time
and resources of a client attempting to perform IBD with SwiftSync. Clients SHOULD obtain a hintsfile from a party that
has a moral, financial, or otherwise incentive-aligned reason to provide truthful data. Examples of such a party include

> local community leaders or meetup organizers that have a direct social incentive to provide a useful hintsfile to users.

Reviewer 2: > Examples of such a party include local community leaders or meetup organizers that have a direct social incentive to provide a useful hintsfile to users.

I'm not sure it's wise to give this kind of advice in a specification, just to point to the risks involved.
